Freemium Metrics

Retention
Retention is a retroactive, time-based measure of product use.
At the user level, retention metrics are binary indications (true/false) of whether or not a user returned to the product some specific number of days after first using it
At the product level, retention metrics are aggregated across the user base
The purpose of retention metrics is to track the frequency and longevity of product use
The retention profile curve provides some guidance in the product development process when designing features to boost retention
Higher retention corresponds to a better product experience, greater personal investment, and a higher level of fulfillment in the product’s fundamental use case.
Retention Metrics: 
    DAU (daily active users)
    DNU (daily new users)
    RetXd with X in {1,3,7,14,30,90,365}
    Stickiness: (Avg DAU) / MAU
    
Monetization
PayConversion is a measure of monetization relative to the entire size of the user base.
It is usually presented as a percentage of users who have made a purchase either up until a specific day or over the lifetime of a product
PayConversion Metrics:
    User2PayUserXd, WebsiteCVR_Xd with X in {0,2,6,13,30,90,365,all time}
    
Revenue Metrics:
    ARPU_Xd
    ARPPU_Xd
    ABPU_Xd
    ABPPU_Xd
    ARPW_Xd
    ARPPW_Xd
    ARPS
    ABPS
    CLV_Xy
    
Engagement
Engagement metrics measure the extent to which users interact with products but also help curate those interactions.
Onboarding- / FirstSession-Funnel: A user’s first session with a product is a critical determinant of the user’s lifetime with the product; it is therefore worthy of the product team’s when trying to optimize the user experience.
The onboarding funnel is an events-based graph of user fall-off, or product abandonment within the formative first moments of interaction between the user and the product. 
The onboarding funnel should be used to measure how well the use case is communicated and instructed.
Session Metrics:
    Avg/Median Session Length
    Avg/Median Sessions per days
Net Promoter Score (NPS): Measure of customer loyalty
Belief that customers are either promoters, extremely satisfied users who will serve as enthusiastic brand ambassadors as well as sources of key repeat revenue, or detractors, extremely dissatisfied users who will undermine brand growth by spreading unflattering testimony of a product experience. 
The net difference between these two groups, can effectively measure the loyalty of its user base.
Single survey question that asks, “On a scale from 1 to 10, how likely are you to recommend this product to others?”

Virality
The extent to which products are distributed without any active marketing participation from a business.
Engineering virality requires the placement of virality hooks within a product - mechanics or product features that connect to a third-party API and can broadcast an aspect of the user’s activity. The most common implementation of virality hooks is through social networks, where the user’s activity is broadcast to friends who, presumably, share similar interests with the user.
Virality Metric:
    k-factor:  Average number of new users each user recruits into the product.
Means that the viral effects of the product compound, or grow over time.

Using metrics in the freemium model
Data can trump intuition only when it is readily available at the time decisions must be made
Data infrastructure is an obvious prerequisite to data-driven product development, but an organizational emphasis on data is as important, if not more so. Each individual on the product team must acknowledge the importance of data in the freemium decision-making process in order for data to be leveraged to its utmost informative extent. Likewise, each member of the product team should be aware of how data can be accessed and be at least familiar with a product’s high-level metrics at any given point in time. Reporting is a critical operational requirement in the
freemium development process, and the team must share enthusiasm and responsibility for taking full advantage of it.

Interpreting data correctly in order to produce action points requires specific
expertise; if that expertise is not present on a product team, then no collection of sophisticated tools, bespoke or not, can render data useful.








